---
layout: post
title: Confronting Racism
category: social

meta:
  nav: blog
  author: mtomko

---

In the wake of unrest in the United States and elsewhere following the
deaths of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor, and countless
others, it is important for us to consider the impact of racism in
every sector of our lives. This includes taking a long, hard look at
race and racism in our community

In this blog post, I want to discuss the problem briefly and then
begin to look at ways that individuals and organizations can learn
about racism and to make changes to improve diversity, equity, and
inclusion.

### The Problem
The United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
produced a
[report](https://www.eeoc.gov/special-report/diversity-high-tech)
showing some sobering statistics about the employment of African
Americans in the technology sector. In the private industry overall,
African Americans represented 14.4 percent of the workforce, but in
the technology sector that number was just 7.4 percent. For
comparison, according to [recent census
data](https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US/RHI225218),
black or African Americans make up approximately 13.4 percent of the
U.S. population. The problem becomes even worse at the executive
level: African Americans fill between 2 and 5.3 percent of executive
roles in technology firms.

A [2016 commissioned
paper](https://www.nap.edu/read/24926/chapter/14#183) produced by the
U.S. National Academies of Science found that African American and
Hispanic people were not underrepresented in terms of computer science
degrees (about 9.2%), but that they were underrepresented in the labor
force (only 5.9%). That study did not address the cause of the
disparity - we are left to speculate if they encountered bias in
hiring and interviewing, hostile work environments, or something else.

Also in 2016, the Harvard Business Review [reported on a
study](https://hbr.org/2016/04/if-theres-only-one-woman-in-your-candidate-pool-theres-statistically-no-chance-shell-be-hired)
on bias in hiring. Their findings showed that when choosing between
three candidates for a position, people tended to choose a black
candidate only if the candidate pool had at least 2 black candidates.
It is worth noting that the effect was the same for gender - a
candidate pool of two men and one women virtually always resulted in
committees recommending a man.

If we are honest with ourselves, these statistics, while sobering,
should not really surprise us. Looking around at our fellow employees,
open source collaborators, and conference attendees, we know that most
are white men. With that, the question becomes, how do we begin to
confront the racism that appears endemic in our industry?

### What Can We Do?

#### Workplace culture
In May, 2020, the Harvard Business Review issued a
[report](https://www.umass.edu/employmentequity/what-works-evidence-based-ideas-increase-diversity-equity-and-inclusion-workplace)
titled "What Works? Evidence-Based Ideas to Increase Diversity,
Equity, and Inclusion in the Workplace". One of the authors, David
Pedulla, also contributed a
[summary](https://hbr.org/2020/05/diversity-and-inclusion-efforts-that-really-work)
which included five strategies for employers to help increase
diversity. These recommendations can help companies attract, and
retain diverse talent.

#### Codes of Conduct
Typelevel has a [code of
conduct](https://typelevel.org/code-of-conduct.html) that emphasizes
the goal of making the community "friendly, safe and welcoming" for
everyone. It prohibits harassment based on (among other things) race
or ethnicity. If you are a member of an underrepresented minority and
feel that anyone in the community is making you feel unwelcome, report
it.

Familiarize yourself with the codes of conduct in whatever
organizations, meetings, or events you participate in. Taking time to
digest these in advance will help guide your behavior but also to
recognize when others may be out of line, and help you understand what
steps you can take. If your professional or avocational circles don't
have a code of conduct, you can begin discussions to find one that
will suit the community.

#### Intervention
However, it must not fall to people of color to recognize and report
harassment or unwelcome behavior. As members of a positive and
welcoming community, we must not be passive bystanders. Learning to
intervene constructively may take some practice.

Robin DiAngelo has a list of [Silence Breakers for Whites in
Cross-racial
Discussions](https://robindiangelo.com/resources/attachment/silence-breakers-for-whites/)
containing 18 different phrases you can use to intervene directly in
an ongoing situation. These phrases can help diffuse a difficult
situation calmly and allow people to save face and, ideally, replace a
harmful discussion with a constructive one.

The Southern Poverty Law Center has also produced some useful
[suggestions](https://www.splcenter.org/20171005/splc-campus-guide-bystander-intervention)
for bystander intervention. Although their document was intended for
use on college campuses, the suggestions may be more broadly
applicable. For instance, the SPLC points out that even if you do not
intervene in the moment, you can document harassing behavior and
provide it to moderators or authorities. In addition, they suggest
that you can provide support to victims even after harassment has
taken place.

When you think about intervening, consider the feelings of the people
you are hoping to protect. You may wish to discretely ask if they
would like help in a situation, if there is time or a private channel
available, especially if you intend to notify a moderator or
supervisor.

#### Education
Those of us who are in the (white) majority owe it to ourselves to
learn about race, racism, and the dark history behind them. We should
also take time to reflect on our role in perpetuating racist power
structures, and how we benefit from the repression of others. Today
there is no shortage of books and resources to help us. Here are a few
commonly-cited resources:

* [Stamped from the Beginning](https://www.ibramxkendi.com/stamped) by [Ibrahim
  Kendi](https://www.ibramxkendi.com/)
* [How to Be an Anti-Racist](https://web.archive.org/web/20201001105306/https://www.ibramxkendi.com/how-to-be-an-antiracist-1) by Ibrahim Kendi
* [So You Want to Talk About Race](https://www.hachettebookgroup.com/titles/ijeoma-oluo/so-you-want-to-talk-about-race/9781580056779/) by [Ijeoma
  Oluo](http://www.ijeomaoluo.com/)
* [White Fragility](https://robindiangelo.com/publications/) by [Robin DiAngelo](https://robindiangelo.com/)
* [Seeing White](https://www.sceneonradio.org/seeing-white/) (podcast)

In addition, we need to look around our own communities for
opportunities to volunteer or contribute. If you cannot march,
consider donating to organizations supporting the Black Lives Matter
movement or to bail funds.


### Black Lives Matter.


### Acknowledgments
This blog post incorporates suggestions and resources provided by Lina
Dahlberg and Maria Dahlberg.
